[Music]
ladies and gentlemen please welcome
senior vice president software
engineering avi - Vania
everybody long time no see
so why aren't you all off coding to the
yellow box we do them back here okay
let's see I'm not going to add a lot of
value to this session I think I said a
lot this morning already
and what I'd like to do right now is
just kick off this session on Mac OS by
basically saying what I said before
which is Apple is totally committed to
improving Mac OS in the long term we
believe that Mac OS is important to our
future we believe that Mac OS is
important to your future and we are
going to invest everything we need to
into it to make sure that it continues
to be excellent now one of the things
that we did to accomplish that goal as
part of our restructuring was to
formally put in place a Mac OS
engineering group this engineering group
their sole mission is to make Mac OS as
good as it can be and as I mentioned
again this morning they are fully
staffed doesn't mean they have all the
people they need on board but they have
open headcount at least and they will be
able to get whatever resources they need
to be successful but I'm not the person
who's going to tell you all the great
things about Mac OS what I would like to
do is to introduce one of my colleagues
Steve glass who's the vice president of
Mac OS engineering he's going to tell
you what the realities about Mac OS and
I just want to say Steve is just a great
guy to work with
and he has over 15 years of experience
at Apple he's seen it all he knows mac
OS his team knows mac OS so please turn
them out with that Steve thank you
if you tell someone their 197 billion
stars in our galaxy the chances are
you'll be believed but if you tell
software engineers that the paint on a
park bench is wet they'll put their hand
out and check it when developers get
together it's our style to believe
nothing and to check everything since
last year there have been as you know
some important OS strategy changes as
well as some improvements in the Mac OS
the plans are set for doing more in the
years to come the pad statement is like
telling you the paint on the bench is
wet so we expect you to check it for
yourself you're going to hear even more
about the Mac OS than you already know
and we're prepared for your
cross-examinations
we're expecting your questions we'll
answer them in the breakout sessions
we'll answer them in the feedback forums
we'll answer them at the demo stations
and compatibility labs we'll answer them
when you corner us as we walk around the
conference because we want you to leave
here convinced and enthusiastic we want
you to be convinced and I personally
want you to be convinced that you can
expect great things from the Mac OS
consider first the popularity of 7.6
it was adopted by users more quickly
than any other version of Mac OS and no
wonder the product offers what users
really want a need because it's faster
and because it has features that really
make a difference but most of all users
want 7.6
because it's more stable something that
just about every developer and every
Macintosh
user and been longing for and that's
good news for you because customers who
go into the stores to buy new versions
of the OS are going in ready to buy
other stuff so the OS continues to
provide a clear opportunity one of the
best possible chances for you to sell
things to these same customers and we're
ready to get these customers back in the
stores again our beta testing shows that
they're going to want Mac OS 8 even more
than they want seven point six and OS
eight will be our third on-time release
customers will be hot after our further
improvements in stability and
performance will be hot after
significant improvements to the finder
and our full suite of Internet
applications and from here it gets
better and better we have a long list of
things we want to do in upcoming
releases in the next few minutes I'm
going to share with you what we're doing
differently the reasons we're doing
things and how we're doing them when
you've heard the details I think you'll
share our conviction that the future is
bright
for Mac OS customers and developers
you've heard a lot and you've read a lot
about the switch and Apple OS strategy
in the Copeland days the thought was
that Copeland would take over no one
would want to use the Mac OS anymore and
any investment improving Mac OS would
just be throwing money away so we put
very little effort into the Mac OS in
fact as recently as two years ago we had
only six engineers working full-time all
they could do was fix a few bugs now in
that well that's changed big-time my Mac
OS engineering organization has over a
hundred people working full-time at
improving Mac OS and other groups in
software engineering have more than a
hundred others doing the same thing our
new dual OS strategy recognizes the need
to continue improving Mac OS at the same
time as we push the boundaries with
Rhapsody in fact rhapsodies BlueBox runs
most of Mac OS unchanged so every
improvement we make to Mac OS improve
the blue box Apple learned a long time
ago that when we talk to you or we talk
to customers you'll tell us what you
think is important we asked when we
asked there were two answers that kept
coming up and I'll bet you know what
they were that's right you wanted it
more stable and faster and so did our
customers Mac OS users so when the OS
team is working on a new release they
have two important marching orders make
it more stable make it faster sure
that's great but it's not everything you
know well that stability and speed are
necessary but by themselves they just
aren't enough as the world changes
features need to be added that our
customers need how do we improve
stability and performance and add
features let's start with stability and
performance some of what we do is just
common sense the first thing we look at
is memory use because memory problems
are the major reason that systems crash
and slow down in 7.6 we scrubbed the
system to improve our use of memory we
eliminated dead code we eliminated code
that was only needed to support old
68,000 machines and we made it possible
for parts of the system heap to be paged
out so system features that aren't being
used won't take up as much space in RAM
in 76 they only come in as needed this
is a good example a space where
performance and stability are related
these changes would not have been
valuable if we had not been able to
improve the stability and performance of
virtual memory the faster more stable VM
combined with a page will system he
makes more real RAM available the last
point here is that our organization is
now staffed to the level where we can
make applause winning advances we have
people looking at performance problems
and looking at the code we have people
at work on pieces of code that haven't
been touched in years code that was
written in a time when memory was scarce
when profiling tools were not available
or when other limitations prevented us
from truly making things better and
there's another way we work these issues
well a way that relies on important
feedback that comes from our developer
base through a very successful seed
program every OS release whether a full
release or an update
is ceded to developers well in advance
of the release so that you can make sure
your products work and that we haven't
screwed something out
currently tempo downloads average 1000
per build 1000 of you are taking your
time to check out our latest work your
participation in this program makes our
releases better and prepares you for
what your customers will see in advance
of the release incidentally if you're
not part of this program I highly
recommend that you look into it with
today's ever shorter ramp times the head
start you can get by starting your
testing early can be critical to sign up
you'll find everything you need at the
dev world website as we choose what to
put in the OS from the years ahead the
focus will be on providing value for
customers there's no sense in
haphazardly introducing thousands of new
api's that don't bring benefits to users
until you the developers have time to
adopt them on the other hand we're
definitely in favor providing new api's
in areas that can make significant
differences for customers but how do you
know we'll make the right choices let's
look at our recent history in 7.6 the
first feature area that we chose to
address was the install experience we
learned when we shipped the 75 3 update
that releasing an improved OS doesn't
get very enthusiastic responses if it's
hard to install correctly the lesson was
painful before we ship 753 we seeded the
release to thousands of developers and
customers the feedback was unanimous it
was a great improvement over 752 so when
we released the update we were surprised
by the number of customers with problems
when we isolated the cause we found that
most of the problems were related to
installation our test sites had become
experts in installing the update
correctly on release
we had a new crop of users who were to
put it gently not so well-trained so in
76 we added a front end to the saw
expirience that put the main read me
where nobody could miss it the front end
also encourages users to update their
disk drivers and only install the
software after first checking the disk
for corruption the result is that seven
six is the easiest OS to install in the
world and we're making Mac OS 8 even
easier we've gone a step further from
our research we know that once you've
installed the O's OS there's a lot of
new setup to do so we've added setup
assistance to make this much more
straightforward another place we've
learned by talking to customers is
extension management many customers and
developers have complained over the
years that it's too hard to manage
extensions it's hard to tell which ones
go together which ones do what and what
can safely be turned off the extension
manager in 7.6
makes that much better and has been very
popular with our customers and we
finally address some of the biggest
limitations in the finder in Mac OS 8
you'll find a new native finder the
ability to do file copying in the
background a smarter look with the new
Platinum appearance you saw some of this
in the opening keynote Pete will be back
to share even more with you in a few
minutes that's some of the recent
decision-making and there's another
compelling reason that we're going to
make the right decisions about what goes
into the Mac OS let me tell you about
the people working on Mac OS
from engineering to marketing to the QA
department every person really cares
about making the OS better most of them
are like me longtime Apple veterans many
who've been with the company more than
10 years and a few who've been at Apple
longer than my 15 years in the core and
the core release engineering team 25% of
the engineers and 40% of the managers
have worked in support they know the
impact of a bad decision on customers
and on developers they'll be all over me
in a second if we're heading down the
wrong road a final point about our
philosophy for mac OS we believe in
incremental improvements this is based
on something I learned early in my
career at Apple my second boss said
apples had a saying perfect software
never ships he was right if you wait
until something is perfect you'll never
finish you know this from your own
experience there's always ways to make
something better there's always a new
customer problem to deal with so it's
our job to make releases very very good
ship them and then immediately start
working with customers and developers to
make them better we need to understand
what's causing problems and to deal with
these problems we've planned updates
where we can fix bugs and add additional
features keeping both customers in you
our loyal developers happy most of you
already know what the general roadmap
looks like for our releases mac OS 8
this summer Allegro next year so not of
the year after with more to come after
that and just because we haven't settled
on a code name yet don't expect Sanada
to be the last one in between the big
releases we'll have updates to fix them
certain bugs add key features and
support new hardware the end result is
that the Mac OS is a safe investment
because we'll continue to improve the
base and add features that customers
need in order to operate easily in our
increasingly connected world although
these roadmaps of relief vehicles are
interesting they don't convey much
detail will tell you a lot more about
Mac OS 8 in a minute but I want to share
with you some of the things that we're
thinking about for future OS releases
none of these decisions is locked down
yet to the point where I can tell you
which release vehicle particulars will
appear in some of the items I'm going to
mention will disappear others not on the
list will be added along the way but
this should give you a good idea of the
areas we think are important and that
we're investing in there four of these
areas first and foremost is stability
and performance and related to this is
system complexity but complexity issues
can lead to stability and performance
problems if the setup procedure isn't
perfectly clear it may not be done right
we believe that the system as a whole is
way too complicated for example why
should a user have to choose how much
RAM an application should use if there's
room why can't an application just have
what it needs
I don't want users running out of RAM
anymore in other areas we're working on
i/o performance boot time and we'll
finally overcome the current block
allocation problem and file size problem
that plagues us today
[Applause]
other items on our list included
attacking bottlenecks like we did with
virtual memory and 755 and 76
for example text drawing is high on our
list we think we can make a significant
improvement here
the second area will stress is user
experience there are a lot of
improvements we know we can achieve in
this area we want to make the Mac OS
even easier to configure and manage
there are some very useful finder
features that weren't completed in time
for Mac OS 8 especially in the area
finder and Internet integration the
information you have on your drive and
on the Internet will be easier to access
with improved navigation and search
tools we want Mac your Mac to really be
your Mac which means allowing you to
customize it in new ways that also means
a better toolbox to present a consistent
user interface even with the easiest to
use system we can still improve how you
access help and get information about
your system we'll also continue to make
our system the best multilingual
platform on the market we've added
Unicode conversion services that allow
you to interchange Mac OS data with
Windows and the Internet and we'll be
putting Unicode support into more parts
of the system in the coming years the
user experience sessions this afternoon
will detail what we're doing in tempo
and what we're planning for the future
and of course will support new
technologies as they come to market
we're looking at DVD UDF Universal
Serial bus firewire and networking
improvements that are appropriate and
affordable let me say a little bit about
Java in this context we're big believers
in Java in fact the mrj team is part of
my organization because we believe Java
support should be a core system service
the team is working hard
five high quality Java Runtime our VM is
recognized as one of the most stable on
any platform our JIT is being seated now
in benchmarks very well and our work to
support jdk 1.1 is well underway for
full details on Java and the Mac OS look
for the mrj session on friday we'll
continue to make improvements we need
and to include Java as a part of the o F
strategy and our OS releases finally one
of the new exciting areas that we're
working on is yellow box on Mac OS we
think that providing a good subset of
yellow box on Mac OS will go a long way
toward improving your proposition for
new development for both Mac OS and
Rhapsody so here are the main points I
want to leave you with Mac OS 8 is a key
part of Apple's dual OS strategy
customers appreciate our current product
but we haven't let that make us
complacent we can tell you with
assurance the customers will really love
what we've got coming so the future can
be brighter for Apple and for developers
- thank you
now with that here's Pete Lowe product
manager of Mac OS 8 to take you through
more of the Mac OS 8 features in the
world of marketing we know from customer
research and sales experience that if
you add blue dots to a laundry detergent
your customers will get excited and
you'll sell more product however this is
only true if your product really cleans
better than the competition Mac OS 8 has
a lot of blue dots and it really does
get your clothes whiter and brighter
with Mac OS 8 Apple is widening the
chasm in user experience leadership in
the personal computer industry by
providing features that ensure the user
is always in control and that they have
the exact capabilities they need Mac OS
8 also includes a complete suite of
internet services for our customers
whether they're connecting to the
internet for the very first time from
their home or from their business or
whether there are very experienced web
professional now at this point I think
I'm going to forget the slides and go
demo
nice little sunset there you like that
obviously we gave you a very quick
preview of the features of Mac OS 8 in
the keynote this morning what I'd like
to do is go into a little bit more depth
and also show you some things we weren't
able to share in the limited time we had
this morning I mentioned the ability to
very directly control the user
experience to navigate your system it's
something we call spring loaded folders
I'm showing it you again here again I
just want to highlight that the user is
always in complete control if I go down
the path that I decide isn't where I
want to go all I have to do is drag out
of that window and the window will
automatically close up for me I can drag
anywhere throughout my system as I did
this morning and when I get to my
destination and I drop that icon notice
that all of the intermediate windows
closed get out of the way to reduce the
desktop clutter as much as possible you
know another thing I'm going to do just
while I have the chance here is I'm
going to start a duplicate I'm going to
duplicate the entire system installation
no I'm not I guess all right that's fine
I'm going to duplicate a subset of the
entire system installation there we go
simply because I can of course now we
want to have some copies going while we
continue to work the system I show
pop-up windows a little while ago again
always making sure the user has all the
information has all the documents they
work with on a regular basis always at
their disposal I want to show you that
we're also providing more rich
information to our users throughout the
user experience we've enhanced the
ListView significantly I think you'll
notice that the new Platinum appearance
that Steve mentioned is now throughout
the interface we've taken advantage of
some grayscale use of colors and some 3d
elements to really make this system much
richer in its aesthetic appearance but
this new appearance is very functional
as well in large ListView windows for
example you can see exactly which items
correspond with which sizes and dates
which is important on a 21 inch monitor
we also know that many of our novice
users don't even realize that you can
sort these list views so by highlighting
the sorted column
darker gray we're able to accentuate the
user interface and make it more
responsive and with buttons at the top
of each column it's mind-numbing ly
obvious that you can sort now these
different columns very easily we've also
provided some additional nuances to the
user interface you notice here that
we're employing relative dating to
highlight when a document was modified
or created obviously it doesn't do me
much good to tell me if that folder was
modified on Tuesday May 13th if I don't
know that today is Tuesday May 13th so
we've improved that experience by excuse
me by including relative dates we also
know that a very popular feature among
experienced users that has been very
difficult to find for novice users is
the fact that in the special menu today
you have this cleanup command with
certain key combinations you click
cleanup by name and date etc etc again a
very popular feature but not many people
know about it so we've made that feature
much more easily accessible through the
new arrange command so with the arrange
command I can very quickly and easily
sort by any criteria I would choose but
to make it even more useful we've made
it possible to make the arrange command
persistent for a given folder or window
so I can specify that I want this folder
always arranged by name and when I do so
if items are automatically sorted for me
and no matter how I manipulate this
window the items are reflow to keep the
sort order that I've specified this is
handy if you always go into your
extensions folder you always want to
alphabetize things you can see that if I
add an item to the list it automatically
appears where you'd expect use after the
tease for example and if I rename an
item an item that is I don't type quite
as well as John did this morning that
item again automatically reflows in the
list to appear in the appropriate spot
now when we use some of these some of
these features together they work very
nicely and very powerfully and I'll give
you an example of that in a moment but
first I'd like to highlight some of the
scalability features that we've provided
as part of Mac OS
you can see that we've rationalize some
of the finder commands and added some
popular requests that would have been
coming from the community for a while
we finally have a move to trash with a
keyboard shortcut
I'm sure why not we now have the ability
to find the original associated with an
alias without having to go into the get
info window right but we also want to
ensure that we don't overwhelm novice
users with a lot of features that
perhaps they don't need so we're also
supporting something called the simple
finder and with the simple finder you
can see that the commands available to
the user are much more direct they're
only the very basic commands a user
needs to work the system they're not
overwhelmed with commands like file
sharing preferences or making aliases or
the ability to accidentally erase a hard
drive for example on those commands just
aren't available to them we've also
taken some of the very popular features
that have appealed to our consumer
customers and extended them throughout
the Mac OS interface so for people who
like a DS or the launcher because of its
button interface we've now extended that
through the finder as well so our novice
users don't have to master the
complexities of double-clicking now if I
could come back just for a moment to
some of those aspects of control you saw
some copying copies happening and you
know you can only you can only demo a
multi-threaded finder so often what
we've done though is we've really done
some subtle implementations of the
threading capability as well so for
example window updating is now
completely threaded you can see as I
open this 4,000 item folder I have a
little progress indicator to show that
it's working I'd like to highlight I did
not cache this window before booting so
it is taking a while and as I said it's
got a lot of items in it and I was able
to control to continue to use the system
while that window was updating and there
was lots of user feedback as well again
to show how some of these features work
together very very nicely let me just
turn off the simple finder because I
can't use it we I'll give you a quick
highlight of how you can use many of
these features together for example if I
set my
recent applications folder that's always
been available since Mackel at 7.5 if I
set that let's say to button and we've
already got it set to small button let's
say keep it arranged by date modified or
date created and we also now have the
ability to display and sort by date
created which we haven't supported in
the past and let's narrow this window a
little bit so we get a column a ver file
of our applications and we drag it to
the bottom to make it a pop-up window
and all of a sudden we have a nice
little application pallet single click
to launch applications and of course you
can drag and drop on top of it as well
what are some of the other things I'd
like to highlight I mentioned the canoe
contextual menus that allow you to
select any item in the finder and you
get just the specific commands that are
appropriate to that item this is also
extensible by you our loyal developers
on so you can add contextual menu
plugins that know how to deal with
certain data types and can extend this
menu based on the user selection you'll
see that the contextual menu obviously
does is contextual when I click in a
window I get the appropriate viewing
commands associated with that window
again we have also integrated a variety
of new internet services into the enter
into Mac OS 8 we're actually going to be
highlighting those this afternoon are
later on today in the 400 session the
internet overview session so please make
sure you come back to that and we'll
share some of those capabilities with
you as well I think the last thing I
want to highlight is actually something
that I don't think we're quite ready to
disclose so I'm going to have to ask you
all to keep this to yourselves don't
share this with anyone but we want to
again make the interface as scalable as
possible but that doesn't just mean
making the entire interface simpler for
novice users it means making the
interface more powerful for everyone so
when we first came out with you know
with the color picking models for the
Mac OS they were pretty innovative and
they really sort of set the mark for how
you would select colors but it still
sort of requires an optical physicist to
figure out CMYK models and things of
that nature
so with Mac OS 8 again we're
implementing a significantly simpler
mechanism for selecting colors in the
Mac OS yeah and a little one of those
power user features to make sure you're
aware of if you click the option key
anytime you have a color picker open in
any application you get a dropper which
works anywhere on the screen and you can
pick up any color from the interface
yeah pretty cool so again that was a
quick demo of some of the features in
Mac OS 8 they just click to advance here
I really really hope that you'll join us
in the hands-on lab and you know what I
think I'd be it's really only only
appropriate for me to mention that you
know yes we have shown some of these
features at the odd developer conference
in the past so one or two of them I
think you've seen before and you might
ask Peter you know what's different this
year well what's different is we're
shifting in July and we're on track for
that
now just before I close I'd like to
share with you some of our plans for
ensuring that Mac OS 8 will attract the
attention of all Mac OS customers and
the computer industry at large Mac OS 8
will be the product of the summer for
Apple Computer all areas of the company
are working together and we will exploit
all methods of communications to ensure
every potential customer understands why
they should upgrade their Mac OS
computer to Mac OS 8 or why they should
buy a new computer with Mac OS 8
throughout the rest of the spring we'll
be providing more and more information
about what Mac OS 8 has to offer beyond
what you're seeing at the Worldwide
Developer Conference this will include
some upcoming partnership announcements
interactive web previews and feature
articles in a number of the industry's
major publications all of these
activities will culminate with a major
introduction of Mac OS 8 in July with
software on retail shelves and boston
mac world in august is going to be a
fantastic showcase for mac OS 8 and all
of apple's breakthrough products
planning has already started and we want
to work with the entire Mac OS community
to ensure that Mac world is a great
party to celebrate the success of Mac OS
8 so you can keep pace with what's
happening both with the software and
with our communications please visit the
Mac OS 8 website which will be growing
over the coming weeks and regularly
visit dev world where you can always get
the latest build also while you're here
this week as we said earlier please
visit the Mac OS 8 hands-on lab
downstairs not only can you play with
the software but you'll leave with a CD
with our latest release beta 3 which was
just finished NYX last week and thanks
to Sony for getting a dupe so quickly
for those of you who are already excuse
me for those of you who have already
been working with Mac OS 8 and providing
feedback on behalf of the entire Mac OS
8 team I'd like to thank you for your
support for everyone else get your hands
on the software and get ready for the
best experience yet now to guide us
through the whole Mac OS track at the
conference here is user experience
evangelist from Mackel
Gordan garb
[Applause]
somehow I believe that this guy Murphy
must have been a developer he sure
understood the complicated world you
developers live in even your conference
gets more complicated than others with
breakout sessions feedback forums
hands-on labs and special events what
are they and how can they help you and
how can this complicated list of things
to do simplify your life as developers
you live in a world of endless and
constant decision-making so coming here
is more of what you do very well you
make up your mind but let's see if I can
help Benjamin Disraeli said it's much
easier to be critical than to be correct
don't worry
we provide plenty of opportunity for you
to be critical but these breakout
sessions are about making sure you have
all the updated and correct information
about the Mac OS please notice session
108 somehow mysteriously escaped from
the printed program grids that you have
it'll be in room a to wednesday from 550
to 650 please don't miss it all of these
sessions are designed for any audience
whether you're new to Mac OS or you're
an experienced Mac OS programmer you can
find out more about the contextual menus
that Dave just showed you and also Apple
data defectors in sessions 102 and then
session 103 if you don't recognize the
name ihe that's because we used to call
it by its codename v-twin apples still
committed to the games market session
107 we'll fill you in on all of that and
in each of these sessions not only do
you get the chance to listen to us and
hear what we have to say but we've set
aside 15 minutes at the end for Q&A to
listen to you for even more feedback the
feedback forums give you a perfect
chance
to be critical or creative just tell us
what you want and we'll be taking notes
the new aspect is this year will be do
more than just listening and not
pleasantly from now on and we mean
business your input will get put into
our action plans and if you think that
comes with pressure from the top you're
right that's not the promise that will
do everything you tell us to but we will
discuss it at our planning sessions and
give it the respectful consideration it
is always deserved think of these
feedback forums as Q&A in Reverse you
could also learn something just by
listening to the feedback forums you
don't have to come there only if you
have something to say
also you'll hear about what happens to
your feedback keep an eye on dev world
and we'll be posting updates as time
goes by this year's general feedback
forum is different with previous years
it will be staffed by executives the
engineers will be there as observers
only if you can make it the only one
feedback forum this is the one not every
session about Mac OS fit into this one
track there are two sessions on the blue
box in Rhapsody you should check out
what many Java and web related topics
are in the internet track checking your
show guide for more details in the Space
Age the most important space is between
the ears and that's what the labs are
all about close-up hands-on getting to
know everything much better there's a
limit to the number of people who can
attend each hands-on lab so sign up and
sign up early again as Dave mentioned
you can qualify for drawing to win a
20th anniversary Mac by going to the lab
and checking it out a clinic is kind of
like a lab but if the Apple script
terminology clinic it's a place for
everyone interested in working with
Apple script to get together and work
together
on hashing out differences in Apple
script terminology and coming up with a
better way of doing things moving
forward at Apple we believe that if you
have a conference without fun you don't
have a conference so we've got several
special events
Fred Hudson for the sixth time has
gathered a stellar list of luminaries to
answer tough questions and for you to
try to outwit and stump the experts if
you've never been there it's kind of
like the computer Bowl it's kind of not
they'll be a ton of people up on stage
it's not being televised it's not being
webcast you have to be their lives to
experience it the human interface design
Excellence Awards being given to the
second time this year recognized
excellence in human interface recognized
innovation recognized elegance
they'll be awarded tonight Guy Kawasaki
is the master of ceremonies they are
surprised two people winning them please
join us later tonight and salute the
winners we're in this together to win
together and feel great about what we're
doing this conference is about coming to
grips with what it takes to win big time
to succeed and to enjoy everything about
it my assignment is to help you spend
your os time profitably so find me here
at the conference and let me help
one-to-one okay thanks have a great
conference
[Applause]
[Music]
whether you grab